:book: Update p2p documentation (#900)
kairos-io/kairos: docs/content/en/docs/Architecture/network.md

title: "P2P Network"
linkTitle: "P2P Network"
weight: 5
date: 2023-02-15
description: >
    How Kairos leverage Peer-to-peer (P2P) to self-coordinate clusters at the edge.
---

## Introduction

> As more organizations seek to take advantage of the benefits of Kubernetes for their edge applications, the difficulties of managing large-scale clusters become apparent. Managing, configuring, and coordinating multiple clusters can be a complex and time-consuming process, especially when zero-touch configuration and self-coordination are necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As more organizations seek to take advantage of the benefits of Kubernetes for their edge applications, the difficulties of managing large-scale clusters become apparent. Managing, configuring, and coordinating multiple clusters can be a complex and time-consuming process. We need solutions that offer zero-touch configuration and self-coordination.
```

To address these challenges, Kairos provides an easy and robust solution for deploying Kubernetes workloads at the edge. By utilizing peer-to-peer (p2p) technology, Kairos can automatically coordinate and create Kubernetes clusters without requiring a control management interface. This frees users to concentrate on running and scaling their applications instead of spending time on cluster management.

In this document, we will examine the advantages of using Kairos to deploy Kubernetes clusters at the edge, and how p2p technology facilitates self-coordination for a zero-touch configuration experience. We will also explore how Kairos' highly adaptable and container-based approach, combined with an immutable OS and meta-distribution, makes it an excellent choice for edge deployments.

## Overview: P2P for self-coordination

<img align="right" width="200" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2420543/219048504-986da0e9-aca3-4c9e-b980-ba2a6dc03bf7.png">

> Kairos creates self-coordinated fully meshed clusters at the edge by using a combination of P2P technology, VPN, and Kubernetes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kairos creates self-coordinated, fully meshed clusters at the edge by using a combination of P2P technology, VPN, and Kubernetes. 
```

This design is made up of several components:

> - the Kairos base OS with support for different distribution flavors and k3s combinations (see our support matrix [here](/docs/reference/image_matrix)).

Reviewer: all other items don't have a dot at the end, feel free to remove this one or add to the others

```suggestion
- the Kairos base OS with support for different distribution flavors and k3s combinations (see our support matrix [here](/docs/reference/image_matrix))
```

> - a Virtual private network interface ([EdgeVPN](https://github.com/mudler/edgevpn) which leverages [libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A virtual private network interface ([EdgeVPN](https://github.com/mudler/edgevpn) which leverages [libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p))
```

Optionally, full connectivity can be established by bringing up a TUN interface, which routes packets via the libp2p network. This enables any application at the OS level to leverage P2P functionalities by using VirtualIPs accessible within the VPN.

The coordination process in Kairos is designed to be resilient and self-coordinated, with no need for complex network configurations or control management interfaces. By using this approach, Kairos simplifies the process of deploying and managing Kubernetes clusters at the edge, making it easy for users to focus on running and scaling their applications.

<p align="center">
<img width="700" src="https://mudler.github.io/edgevpn/docs/concepts/architecture/edevpn_bootstrap_hu8e61a09dccbf3a67bf1fc604ae4924fd_64246_1200x550_fit_catmullrom_3.png">
</p>

### Packet flow

The Virtual Private Network used is [EdgeVPN](https://github.com/mudler/edgevpn), which leverages [libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p) for the transport layer.

To explain how the packet flow works between two nodes, Node A and Node B, refer to the diagram below:

<p align="center">

> <img width="700" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2420543/219048445-300de7e8-428f-4ded-848d-bf73c56acca1.png">

Reviewer: I find the image a bit small inside the docs, opening the image on its own looks good though, so maybe increase the width? but it could be my small monitor so feel free to ignore

</p>

> While partecipating actively to a network, each node keeps the shared ledger up-to-date with information about itself and how to be reachable by advertizing its own IP and the libp2p identity, allowing nodes to discover each other and know how to route packets. Assuming that we want to establish an SSH connection from Node A to Node B through the VPN network, which exposes the `sshd` service, the process is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While partecipating actively on a network, each node keeps the shared ledger up-to-date with information about itself and how to be reached by advertizing its own IP and the libp2p identity, allowing nodes to discover each other and how to route packets.

Assuming that we want to establish an SSH connection from Node A to Node B through the VPN network, which exposes the `sshd` service, the process is as follows:
```

2. EdgeVPN reads the frame from the TUN interface.
3. If EdgeVPN finds a match in the ledger between the VirtualIP and an associated Identity, it opens a p2p stream to Node B using the libp2p Identity.
4. Node B receives the incoming p2p stream from EdgeVPN.
5. Node B performs a lookup in the shared ledger.
6. If a match is found, Node B routes the packet back to the TUN interface, up to the application level.

### Controller

A set of Kubernetes Native Extensions ([Entangle](/docs/reference/entangle)) provides peer-to-peer functionalities also to existing clusters by allowing to bridge connection with the same design architecture described above.

It can be used to:

- Bridge services between clusters
- Bridge external connections to cluster
- Setup EdgeVPN as a daemonset between cluster nodes

See also the Entangle [documentation](/docs/reference/entangle) to learn more about it.

## Benefits

<p align="center">
<img width="700" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2420543/195459436-236139cf-605d-4608-9018-ea80381d4e77.png">
</p>

The use of p2p technology to enable self-coordination of Kubernetes clusters in Kairos offers a number of benefits:

> 1. **Simplified deployment**: With Kairos, deploying Kubernetes clusters at the edge is greatly simplified. Users don’t need to specify any network settings or use a control management interface to set up and manage their clusters.

Reviewer: I think it's ok to remove the "with Kairos" here and on other items since the line above mentions "Kairos offers"

## Implementation

Peer-to-peer (P2P) networking is used to coordinate and bootstrap nodes. When this functionality is enabled, there is a distributed ledger accessible over the nodes that can be programmatically accessed and used to store metadata.

Kairos can automatically set up a VPN between nodes using a shared secret. This enables the nodes to automatically coordinate, discover, configure, and establish a network overlay spanning across multiple regions. [EdgeVPN](https://github.com/mudler/edgevpn) is used for this purpose.

The private network is bootstrapped in three phases, with discovery driven by a distributed hash table (DHT) and multicast DNS (mDNS), which can be selectively disabled or enabled. The three phases are:

1. Discovery
1. Gossip network
1. Full connectivity

> During the discovery phase, which can occur via mDNS (for LAN) or DHT (for WAN). During this phase, nodes discover each other by broadcasting their presence to the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the discovery phase, which can occur via mDNS (for LAN) or DHT (for WAN), nodes discover each other by broadcasting their presence to the network.
```

Author: :+1:

It's also worth noting that while a VPN provides a unified network environment, it may not be necessary or appropriate for all use cases. Users can choose to opt-out of using the VPN and leverage only the coordination aspect, for example, with KubeVIP. Ultimately, the decision to use a VPN should be based on the specific needs and requirements of your Kubernetes cluster, and as such you can just use the co-ordination aspect and leverage for instance [KubeVIP](/docs/examples/multi-node-p2p-ha-kubevip).

### Packet flow

The Virtual Private Network used is [EdgeVPN](https://github.com/mudler/edgevpn), which leverages [libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p) for the transport layer.

To explain how the packet flow works between two nodes, Node A and Node B, refer to the diagram below:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2420543/219048445-300de7e8-428f-4ded-848d-bf73c56acca1.png">
</p>

> While partecipating actively on a network, each node keeps the shared ledger up-to-date with information about itself and how to be reached by advertizing its own IP and the libp2p identity, allowing nodes to discover each other and how to route packets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While participating actively on a network, each node keeps the shared ledger up-to-date with information about itself and how to be reached by advertizing its own IP and the libp2p identity, allowing nodes to discover each other and how to route packets.
```

Author: thanks! merged all :+1:

1. **Secure and replicated**: The use of rendezvous points and a shared ledger, encrypted with AES and rotated via OTP, ensures that the p2p network is secure and resilient. This is especially important when deploying Kubernetes clusters at the edge, where network conditions can be unpredictable.
1. **Resilient**: Kairos ensures that the cluster remains resilient, even in the face of network disruptions or failures. By using VirtualIPs, nodes can communicate with each other without the need for static IPs, and the cluster's etcd database remains unaffected by any disruptions.
1. **Scalable**: Kairos is designed to be highly scalable. With the use of p2p technology, users can easily add or remove nodes from the cluster, without the need for any external management interface.

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
